Greece (Greek: Ελλάδα, About this sound Elláda [eˈlaða]), officially the Hellenic Republic (Greek: Ελληνική Δημοκρατία Ellinikí Dimokratía [
eliniˈci ðimokraˈti.a]), historically also known as Hellas (Ancient Greek: Ἑλλάς Hellás [heˈlas]),[8][9][10][11] is a country in southeastern 
Europe, with a population of approximately 11 million as of 2015. Athens is the nation's capital and largest city, followed by Thessaloniki.
Greece is strategically located at the crossroads of Europe, Asia, and Africa. Situated on the southern tip of the Balkan peninsula, it shares 
land borders with Albania to the northwest, the Republic of Macedonia and Bulgaria to the north, and Turkey to the northeast. Greece consists of 
nine geographic regions: Macedonia, Central Greece, the Peloponnese, Thessaly, Epirus, the Aegean Islands (including the Dodecanese and 
Cyclades), Thrace, Crete, and the Ionian Islands. The Aegean Sea lies to the east of the mainland, the Ionian Sea to the west, the Cretan Sea 
and the Mediterranean Sea to the south. Greece has the longest coastline on the Mediterranean Basin and the 11th longest coastline in the world 
at 13,676 km (8,498 mi) in length, featuring a vast number of islands, of which 227 are inhabited. Eighty percent of Greece is mountainous, with 
Mount Olympus being the highest peak at 2,918 metres (9,573 ft).
Greece is considered the cradle of Western civilization, being the birthplace of democracy, Western philosophy, the Olympic Games, Western 
literature, historiography, political science, major scientific and mathematical principles, and Western drama.[12] From the eighth century BC, 
the Greeks were organised into various independent city-states, known as polis, which spanned the entire Mediterranean region and the Black Sea. 
Philip of Macedon united most of the Greek mainland in the fourth century BC, with his son Alexander the Great rapidly conquering much of the 
ancient world, spreading Greek culture and science from the eastern Mediterranean to the Indus River. Greece was annexed by Rome in the second 
century BC, becoming an integral part of the Roman Empire and its successor, the Byzantine Empire, wherein the Greek language and culture were 
dominant. The Greek Orthodox Church also shaped modern Greek identity and transmitted Greek traditions to the wider Orthodox World.[13] Falling 
under Ottoman dominion in the mid-15th century, the modern nation state of Greece emerged in 1830 following a war of independence. Greece's rich 
historical legacy is reflected by its 18 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, among the most in Europe and the world.[14]
Greece is a democratic and developed country with an advanced high-income economy, a high quality of life, and a very high standard of living. A 
founding member of the United Nations, Greece was the tenth member to join the European Communities (precursor to the European Union) and has 
been part of the Eurozone since 2001. It is also a member of numerous other international institutions, including the Council of Europe, the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (
WTO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF). Greece's 
unique cultural heritage, large tourism industry, prominent shipping sector and geostrategic importance[a] classify it as a middle power. It is 
the largest economy in the Balkans, where it is an important regional investor.
The names for the nation of Greece and the Greek people differ from the names used in other languages, locations and cultures. Although the 
Greeks call the country Hellas or Ellada (Greek: Ἑλλάς or Ελλάδα) and its official name is the Hellenic Republic, in English it is referred to 
as Greece, which comes from the Latin term Graecia as used by the Romans, which literally means 'the land of the Greeks', and derives from the 
Greek name Γραικός.
The earliest evidence of the presence of human ancestors in the southern Balkans, dated to 270,000 BC, is to be found in the Petralona cave, in 
the Greek province of Macedonia.[23] All three stages of the stone age (Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic) are represented in Greece, for 
example in the Franchthi Cave.[24] Neolithic settlements in Greece, dating from the 7th millennium BC,[23] are the oldest in Europe by several 
centuries, as Greece lies on the route via which farming spread from the Near East to Europe.[25]
Greece is home to the first advanced civilizations in Europe and is considered the birthplace of Western civilization,[26][27][28][29] beginning 
with the Cycladic civilization on the islands of the Aegean Sea at around 3200 BC,[30] the Minoan civilization in Crete (2700–1500 BC),[29][31] 
and then the Mycenaean civilization on the mainland (1900–1100 BC).[31] These civilizations possessed writing, the Minoans writing in an 
undeciphered script known as Linear A, and the Mycenaeans in Linear B, an early form of Greek. The Mycenaeans gradually absorbed the Minoans, 
but collapsed violently around 1200 BC, during a time of regional upheaval known as the Bronze Age collapse.[32] This ushered in a period known 
as the Greek Dark Ages, from which written records are absent.
The end of the Dark Ages is traditionally dated to 776 BC, the year of the first Olympic Games.[33] The Iliad and the Odyssey, the foundational 
texts of Western literature, are believed to have been composed by Homer in the 7th or 8th centuries BC.[34][35] With the end of the Dark Ages, 
there emerged various kingdoms and city-states across the Greek peninsula, which spread to the shores of the Black Sea, Southern Italy ("Magna 
Graecia") and Asia Minor. These states and their colonies reached great levels of prosperity that resulted in an unprecedented cultural boom, 
that of classical Greece, expressed in architecture, drama, science, mathematics and philosophy. In 508 BC, Cleisthenes instituted the world's 
first democratic system of government in Athens.[36][37]
By 500 BC, the Persian Empire controlled the Greek city states in Asia Minor and Macedonia.[38] Attempts by some of the Greek city-states of 
Asia Minor to overthrow Persian rule failed, and Persia invaded the states of mainland Greece in 492 BC, but was forced to withdraw after a 
defeat at the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC. A second invasion by the Persians followed in 480 BC. Following decisive Greek victories in 480 and 
479 BC at Salamis, Plataea, and Mycale, the Persians were forced to withdraw for a second time, marking their eventual withdrawal from all of 
their European territories. Led by Athens and Sparta, the Greek victories in the Greco-Persian Wars are considered a pivotal moment in world 
history,[39] as the 50 years of peace that followed are known as the Golden Age of Athens, the seminal period of ancient Greek development that 
laid many of the foundations of Western civilization.
Lack of political unity within Greece resulted in frequent conflict between Greek states. The most devastating intra-Greek war was the 
Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC), won by Sparta and marking the demise of the Athenian Empire as the leading power in ancient Greece. Both Athens 
and Sparta were later overshadowed by Thebes and eventually Macedon, with the latter uniting the Greek world in the League of Corinth (also 
known as the Hellenic League or Greek League) under the guidance of Phillip II, who was elected leader of the first unified Greek state in 
history.
Following the assassination of Phillip II, his son Alexander III ("The Great") assumed the leadership of the League of Corinth and launched an 
invasion of the Persian Empire with the combined forces of all Greek states in 334 BC. Undefeated in battle, Alexander had conquered the Persian 
Empire in its entirety by 330 BC. By the time of his death in 323 BC, he had created one of the largest empires in history, stretching from 
Greece to India. His empire split into several kingdoms upon his death, the most famous of which were the Seleucid Empire, Ptolemaic Egypt, the 
Greco-Bactrian Kingdom, and the Indo-Greek Kingdom. Many Greeks migrated to Alexandria, Antioch, Seleucia, and the many other new Hellenistic 
cities in Asia and Africa.[40] Although the political unity of Alexander's empire could not be maintained, it resulted in the Hellenistic 
civilization and spread the Greek language and Greek culture in the territories conquered by Alexander.[41] Greek science, technology, and 
mathematics are generally considered to have reached their peak during the Hellenistic period.[42]
After a period of confusion following Alexander's death, the Antigonid dynasty, descended from one of Alexander's generals, established its 
control over Macedon and most of the Greek city-states by 276 BC.[43] From about 200 BC the Roman Republic became increasingly involved in Greek 
affairs and engaged in a series of wars with Macedon.[44] Macedon's defeat at the Battle of Pydna in 168 BC signalled the end of Antigonid power 
in Greece.[45] In 146 BC, Macedonia was annexed as a province by Rome, and the rest of Greece became a Roman protectorate.[44][46]
The process was completed in 27 BC when the Roman Emperor Augustus annexed the rest of Greece and constituted it as the senatorial province of 
Achaea.[46] Despite their military superiority, the Romans admired and became heavily influenced by the achievements of Greek culture, hence 
Horace's famous statement: Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit ("Greece, although captured, took its wild conqueror captive").[47] The epics of 
Homer inspired the Aeneid of Virgil, and authors such as Seneca the younger wrote using Greek styles. Roman heroes such as Scipio Africanus, 
tended to study philosophy and regarded Greek culture and science as an example to be followed. Similarly, most Roman emperors maintained an 
admiration for things Greek in nature. The Roman Emperor Nero visited Greece in AD 66, and performed at the Ancient Olympic Games, despite the 
rules against non-Greek participation. Hadrian was also particularly fond of the Greeks; before he became emperor, he served as an eponymous 
archon of Athens.
Greek-speaking communities of the Hellenized East were instrumental in the spread of early Christianity in the 2nd and 3rd centuries,[48] and 
Christianity's early leaders and writers (notably St Paul) were mostly Greek-speaking, though generally not from Greece itself.[49] The New 
Testament was written in Greek, and some of its sections (Corinthians, Thessalonians, Philippians, Revelation of St. John of Patmos) attest to 
the importance of churches in Greece in early Christianity. Nevertheless, much of Greece clung tenaciously to paganism, and ancient Greek 
religious practices were still in vogue in the late 4th century AD,[50] when they were outlawed by the Roman emperor Theodosius I in 
391–392.[51] The last recorded Olympic games were held in 393,[52] and many temples were destroyed or damaged in the century that followed.[53] 
In Athens and rural areas, paganism is attested well into the sixth century AD[53] and even later.[54] The closure of the Neoplatonic Academy of 
Athens by the emperor Justinian in 529 is considered by many to mark the end of antiquity, although there is evidence that the Academy continued 
its activities for some time after that.[53] Some remote areas such as the southeastern Peloponnese remained pagan until well into the 10th 
century AD.[55]
The Roman Empire in the east, following the fall of the Empire in the west in the 5th century, is conventionally known as the Byzantine Empire (
but was simply called "Roman Empire" in its own time) and lasted until 1453. With its capital in Constantinople, its language and literary 
culture was Greek and its religion was predominantly Eastern Orthodox Christian.[56]
From the 4th century, the Empire's Balkan territories, including Greece, suffered from the dislocation of the Barbarian Invasions. The raids and 
devastation of the Goths and Huns in the 4th and 5th centuries and the Slavic invasion of Greece in the 7th century resulted in a dramatic 
collapse in imperial authority in the Greek peninsula.[57] Following the Slavic invasion, the imperial government retained formal control of 
only the islands and coastal areas, particularly the densely populated walled cities such as Athens, Corinth and Thessalonica, while some 
mountainous areas in the interior held out on their own and continued to recognize imperial authority.[57] Outside of these areas, a limited 
amount of Slavic settlement is generally thought to have occurred, although on a much smaller scale than previously thought.[58][59]
The Byzantine recovery of lost provinces began toward the end of the 8th century and most of the Greek peninsula came under imperial control 
again, in stages, during the 9th century.[60][61] This process was facilitated by a large influx of Greeks from Sicily and Asia Minor to the 
Greek peninsula, while at the same time many Slavs were captured and re-settled in Asia Minor and the few that remained were assimilated.[58] 
During the 11th and 12th centuries the return of stability resulted in the Greek peninsula benefiting from strong economic growth – much 
stronger than that of the Anatolian territories of the Empire.[60]
Following the Fourth Crusade and the fall of Constantinople to the "Latins" in 1204 mainland Greece was split between the Greek Despotate of 
Epirus (a Byzantine successor state) and French rule[62] (known as the Frankokratia), while some islands came under Venetian rule.[63] The 
re-establishment of the Byzantine imperial capital in Constantinople in 1261 was accompanied by the empire's recovery of much of the Greek 
peninsula, although the Frankish Principality of Achaea in the Peloponnese and the rival Greek Despotate of Epirus in the north both remained 
important regional powers into the 14th century, while the islands remained largely under Genoese and Venetian control.[62]
In the 14th century, much of the Greek peninsula was lost by the Byzantine Empire at first to the Serbs and then to the Ottomans.[64] By the 
beginning of the 15th century, the Ottoman advance meant that Byzantine territory in Greece was limited mainly to its then-largest city, 
Thessaloniki, and the Peloponnese (Despotate of the Morea).[64] After the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453, the Morea was the last 
remnant of the Byzantine Empire to hold out against the Ottomans. However, this, too, fell to the Ottomans in 1460, completing the Ottoman 
conquest of mainland Greece.[65] With the Turkish conquest, many Byzantine Greek scholars, who up until then were largely responsible for 
preserving Classical Greek knowledge, fled to the West, taking with them a large body of literature and thereby significantly contributing to 
the Renaissance.[66]
While most of mainland Greece and the Aegean islands was under Ottoman control by the end of the 15th century, Cyprus and Crete remained 
Venetian territory and did not fall to the Ottomans until 1571 and 1670 respectively. The only part of the Greek-speaking world that escaped 
long-term Ottoman rule was the Ionian Islands, which remained Venetian until their capture by the First French Republic in 1797, then passed to 
the United Kingdom in 1809 until their unification with Greece in 1864.[68]
While some Greeks in the Ionian Islands and Constantinople lived in prosperity, and Greeks of Constantinople (Phanariotes) achieved positions of 
power within the Ottoman administration,[69] much of the population of mainland Greece suffered the economic consequences of the Ottoman 
conquest. Heavy taxes were enforced, and in later years the Ottoman Empire enacted a policy of creation of hereditary estates, effectively 
turning the rural Greek populations into serfs.[70]
The Greek Orthodox Church and the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople were considered by the Ottoman governments as the ruling authorities 
of the entire Orthodox Christian population of the Ottoman Empire, whether ethnically Greek or not. Although the Ottoman state did not force 
non-Muslims to convert to Islam, Christians faced several types of discrimination intended to highlight their inferior status in the Ottoman 
Empire. Discrimination against Christians, particularly when combined with harsh treatment by local Ottoman authorities, led to conversions to 
Islam, if only superficially. In the 19th century, many "crypto-Christians" returned to their old religious allegiance.[71]
The nature of Ottoman administration of Greece varied, though it was invariably arbitrary and often harsh.[71] Some cities had governors 
appointed by the Sultan, while others (like Athens) were self-governed municipalities. Mountains regions in the interior and many islands 
remained effectively autonomous from the central Ottoman state for many centuries.[72][page needed]
When military conflicts broke out between the Ottoman Empire and enemies, Greeks usually took arms against the empire, with few exceptions. 
Prior to the Greek Revolution of 1821, there had been a number of wars which saw Greeks fight against the Ottomans, such as the Greek 
participation in the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, the Epirus peasants' revolts of 1600–1601, the Morean War of 1684–1699, and the 
Russian-instigated Orlov Revolt in 1770, which aimed at breaking up the Ottoman Empire in favor of Russian interests.[72][page needed] These 
uprisings were put down by the Ottomans with great bloodshed.[73][74] On the other side, many Greeks were conscripted as Ottoman citizens to 
serve in the Ottoman army (and especially the Ottoman navy), while the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, responsible for the Orthodox, 
remained in general loyal to the empire.
The 16th and 17th centuries are regarded as something of a "dark age" in Greek history, with the prospect of overthrowing Ottoman rule appearing 
remote with only the Ionian islands remaining free of Turkish domination. Corfu withstood three major sieges in 1537, 1571 and 1716 all of which 
resulted in the repulsion of the Ottomans. However, in the 18th century, there arose through shipping a wealthy and dispersed Greek merchant 
class. These merchants came to dominate trade within the Ottoman Empire, establishing communities throughout the Mediterranean, the Balkans, and 
Western Europe. Though the Ottoman conquest had cut Greece off from significant European intellectual movements such as the Reformation and the 
Enlightenment, these ideas together with the ideals of the French Revolution and romantic nationalism began to penetrate the Greek world via the 
mercantile diaspora.[75] In the late 18th century, Rigas Feraios, the first revolutionary to envision an independent Greek state, published a 
series of documents relating to Greek independence, including but not limited to a national anthem and the first detailed map of Greece, in 
Vienna, and was murdered by Ottoman agents in 1798.[76][77]
In the late eighteenth century, an increase in secular learning during the Modern Greek Enlightenment led to the revival among Greeks of the 
diaspora of the notion of a Greek nation tracing its existence to ancient Greece, distinct from the other Orthodox peoples, and having a right 
to political autonomy. One of the organizations formed in this intellectual milieu was the Filiki Eteria, a secret organization formed by 
merchants in Odessa in 1814.[78] Appropriating a long-standing tradition of Orthodox messianic prophecy aspiring to the resurrection of the 
eastern Roman empire and creating the impression they had the backing of Tsarist Russia, they managed amidst a crisis of Ottoman trade, from 
1815 onwards, to engage traditional strata of the Greek Orthodox world in their liberal nationalist cause.[79] The Filiki Eteria planned to 
launch revolution in the Peloponnese, the Danubian Principalities and Constantinople. The first of these revolts began on 6 March 1821 in the 
Danubian Principalities under the leadership of Alexandros Ypsilantis, but it was soon put down by the Ottomans. The events in the north spurred 
the Greeks of the Peloponnese into action and on 17 March 1821 the Maniots declared war on the Ottomans.[80]
By the end of the month, the Peloponnese was in open revolt against the Ottomans and by October 1821 the Greeks under Theodoros Kolokotronis had 
captured Tripolitsa. The Peloponnesian revolt was quickly followed by revolts in Crete, Macedonia and Central Greece, which would soon be 
suppressed. Meanwhile, the makeshift Greek navy was achieving success against the Ottoman navy in the Aegean Sea and prevented Ottoman 
reinforcements from arriving by sea. In 1822 and 1824 the Turks and Egyptians ravaged the islands, including Chios and Psara, committing 
wholesale massacres of the population.[80] This had the effect of galvanizing public opinion in western Europe in favor of the Greek rebels.[72][
page needed]
Tensions soon developed among different Greek factions, leading to two consecutive civil wars. Meanwhile, the Ottoman Sultan negotiated with 
Mehmet Ali of Egypt, who agreed to send his son Ibrahim Pasha to Greece with an army to suppress the revolt in return for territorial gain. 
Ibrahim landed in the Peloponnese in February 1825 and had immediate success: by the end of 1825, most of the Peloponnese was under Egyptian 
control, and the city of Missolonghi—put under siege by the Turks since April 1825—fell in April 1826. Although Ibrahim was defeated in Mani, he 
had succeeded in suppressing most of the revolt in the Peloponnese and Athens had been retaken.
After years of negotiation, three Great Powers, Russia, the United Kingdom, and France, decided to intervene in the conflict and each nation 
sent a navy to Greece. Following news that combined Ottoman–Egyptian fleets were going to attack the Greek island of Hydra, the allied fleet 
intercepted the Ottoman–Egyptian fleet at Navarino. After a week-long standoff, a battle began which resulted in the destruction of the 
Ottoman–Egyptian fleet. A French expeditionary force was dispatched to supervise the evacuation of the Egyptian army from the Peloponnese, while 
the Greeks proceeded to the captured part of Central Greece by 1828. As a result of years of negotiation, the nascent Greek state was finally 
recognized under the London Protocol in 1830.
In 1827, Ioannis Kapodistrias, from Corfu, was chosen by the Third National Assembly at Troezen as the first governor of the First Hellenic 
Republic. Kapodistrias established a series of state, economic and military institutions. Soon tensions appeared between him and local 
interests. Following his assassination in 1831 and the subsequent conference a year later, the Great Powers of Britain, France and Russia 
installed Bavarian Prince Otto von Wittelsbach as monarch.[81] One of his first actions was to transfer the capital from Nafplio to Athens. In 
1843 an uprising forced the king to grant a constitution and a representative assembly.
Due to his authoritarian rule, he was eventually dethroned in 1862 and a year later replaced by Prince Wilhelm (William) of Denmark, who took 
the name George I and brought with him the Ionian Islands as a coronation gift from Britain. In 1877 Charilaos Trikoupis, who is credited with 
significant improvement of the country's infrastructure, curbed the power of the monarchy to interfere in the assembly by issuing the rule of 
vote of confidence to any potential prime minister.
Corruption and Trikoupis' increased spending to create necessary infrastructure like the Corinth Canal overtaxed the weak Greek economy, forcing 
the declaration of public insolvency in 1893 and to accept the imposition of an International Financial Control authority to pay off the 
country's debtors. Another political issue in 19th-century Greece was uniquely Greek: the language question. The Greek people spoke a form of 
Greek called Demotic. Many of the educated elite saw this as a peasant dialect and were determined to restore the glories of Ancient Greek.
The Nazis proceeded to administer Athens and Thessaloniki, while other regions of the country were given to Nazi Germany's partners, Fascist 
Italy and Bulgaria. The occupation brought about terrible hardships for the Greek civilian population. Over 100,000 civilians died of starvation 
during the winter of 1941–1942, tens of thousands more died because of reprisals by Nazis and collaborators, the country's economy was ruined, 
and the great majority of Greek Jews were deported and murdered in Nazi concentration camps.[95][96] The Greek Resistance, one of the most 
effective resistance movements in Europe, fought vehemently against the Nazis and their collaborators. The German occupiers committed numerous 
atrocities, mass executions, and wholesale slaughter of civilians and destruction of towns and villages in reprisals. In the course of the 
concerted anti-guerilla campaign, hundreds of villages were systematically torched and almost 1,000,000 Greeks left homeless.[96] In total, the 
Germans executed some 21,000 Greeks, the Bulgarians 40,000, and the Italians 9,000.[97]
People in Athens celebrate the liberation from the Axis powers, October 1944. Postwar Greece will experience a civil war and political 
polarization.
After liberation and the Allies' win over Axis, Greece annexed the Dodecanese islands. Soon the country experienced a polarising civil war 
between communist and anticommunist forces until 1949, which led to economic devastation and severe social tensions between rightists and 
largely communist leftists for the next thirty years.[98] The next twenty years were characterized by marginalisation of the left in the 
political and social spheres and by rapid economic growth, propelled in part by the Marshall Plan.
The former prime minister Konstantinos Karamanlis was invited back from Paris where he had lived in self-exile since 1963, marking the beginning 
of the Metapolitefsi era. The first multiparty elections since 1964 were held on the first anniversary of the Polytechnic uprising. A democratic 
and republican constitution was promulgated on 11 June 1975 following a referendum which chose to not restore the monarchy.
Located in Southern Europe,[103] Greece is a transcontinental country that consists of a mountainous, peninsular mainland jutting out into the 
sea at the southern end of the Balkans, ending at the Peloponnese peninsula (separated from the mainland by the canal of the Isthmus of Corinth) 
and strategically located at the crossroads of Europe, Asia, and Africa.[104][105][106] Due to its highly indented coastline and numerous 
islands, Greece has the 11th longest coastline in the world with 13,676 km (8,498 mi);[107] its land boundary is 1,160 km (721 mi). The country 
lies approximately between latitudes 34° and 42° N, and longitudes 19° and 30° E, with the extreme points being:[108]
North: Ormenio village
South: Gavdos island
East: Strongyli (Kastelorizo, Megisti) island
West: Othonoi island
Eighty percent of Greece consists of mountains or hills, making the country one of the most mountainous in Europe. Mount Olympus, the mythical 
abode of the Greek Gods, culminates at Mytikas peak 2,918 metres (9,573 ft),[109] the highest in the country. Western Greece contains a number 
of lakes and wetlands and is dominated by the Pindus mountain range. The Pindus, a continuation of the Dinaric Alps, reaches a maximum elevation 
of 2,637 m (8,652 ft) at Mt. Smolikas (the second-highest in Greece) and historically has been a significant barrier to east-west travel.
The Pindus range continues through the central Peloponnese, crosses the islands of Kythera and Antikythera and finds its way into southwestern 
Aegean, in the island of Crete where it eventually ends. The islands of the Aegean are peaks of underwater mountains that once constituted an 
extension of the mainland. Pindus is characterized by its high, steep peaks, often dissected by numerous canyons and a variety of other karstic 
landscapes. The spectacular Vikos Gorge, part of the Vikos-Aoos National Park in the Pindus range, is listed by the Guinness book of World 
Records as the deepest gorge in the world.[110] Another notable formation are the Meteora rock pillars, atop which have been built medieval 
Greek Orthodox monasteries.
Northeastern Greece features another high-altitude mountain range, the Rhodope range, spreading across the region of East Macedonia and Thrace; 
this area is covered with vast, thick, ancient forests, including the famous Dadia forest in the Evros regional unit, in the far northeast of 
the country.
Extensive plains are primarily located in the regions of Thessaly, Central Macedonia and Thrace. They constitute key economic regions as they 
are among the few arable places in the country. Rare marine species such as the pinniped seals and the loggerhead sea turtle live in the seas 
surrounding mainland Greece, while its dense forests are home to the endangered brown bear, the Eurasian lynx, the roe deer and the wild goat.
Islands[edit]
Main article: List of islands of Greece
Greece features a vast number of islands, between 1,200 and 6,000, depending on the definition,[111] 227 of which are inhabited. Crete is the 
largest and most populous island; Euboea, separated from the mainland by the 60m-wide Euripus Strait, is the second largest, followed by Lesbos 
and Rhodes.
The Greek islands are traditionally grouped into the following clusters: The Argo-Saronic Islands in the Saronic gulf near Athens, the Cyclades, 
a large but dense collection occupying the central part of the Aegean Sea, the North Aegean islands, a loose grouping off the west coast of 
Turkey, the Dodecanese, another loose collection in the southeast between Crete and Turkey, the Sporades, a small tight group off the coast of 
northeast Euboea, and the Ionian Islands, located to the west of the mainland in the Ionian Sea.
Climate[edit]
Further information: Climate of Greece
A view of Mount Olympus, the highest mountain in Greece and mythical abode of the Gods of Olympus
The climate of Greece is primarily Mediterranean, featuring mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers. This climate occurs at all coastal 
locations, including Athens, the Cyclades, the Dodecanese, Crete, the Peloponnese, the Ionian Islands and parts of the Central Continental 
Greece region. The Pindus mountain range strongly affects the climate of the country, as areas to the west of the range are considerably wetter 
on average (due to greater exposure to south-westerly systems bringing in moisture) than the areas lying to the east of the range (due to a rain 
shadow effect).
The mountainous areas of Northwestern Greece (parts of Epirus, Central Greece, Thessaly, Western Macedonia) as well as in the mountainous 
central parts of Peloponnese – including parts of the regional units of Achaea, Arcadia and Laconia – feature an Alpine climate with heavy 
snowfalls. The inland parts of northern Greece, in Central Macedonia and East Macedonia and Thrace feature a temperate climate with cold, damp 
winters and hot, dry summers with frequent thunderstorms. Snowfalls occur every year in the mountains and northern areas, and brief snowfalls 
are not unknown even in low-lying southern areas, such as Athens.
Ecology[edit]
Phytogeographically, Greece belongs to the Boreal Kingdom and is shared between the East Mediterranean province of the Mediterranean Region and 
the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature and the European Environment Agency, the territory 
of Greece can be subdivided into six ecoregions: the Illyrian deciduous forests, Pindus Mountains mixed forests, Balkan mixed forests, Rhodope 
montane mixed forests, Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests and Crete Mediterranean forests.
Politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of Greece
The building of the Hellenic Parliament in central Athens.
Count Ioannis Kapodistrias, first governor and founder of the modern Greek State
Greece is a unitary parliamentary republic.[112] The nominal head of state is the President of the Republic, who is elected by the Parliament 
for a five-year term.[112] The current Constitution was drawn up and adopted by the Fifth Revisionary Parliament of the Hellenes and entered 
into force in 1975 after the fall of the military junta of 1967–1974. It has been revised three times since, in 1986, 2001 and 2008. The 
Constitution, which consists of 120 articles, provides for a separation of powers into executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and grants 
extensive specific guarantees (further reinforced in 2001) of civil liberties and social rights.[113][114] Women's suffrage was guaranteed with 
an amendment to the 1952 Constitution.
According to the Constitution, executive power is exercised by the President of the Republic and the Government.[112] From the Constitutional 
amendment of 1986 the President's duties were curtailed to a significant extent, and they are now largely ceremonial; most political power thus 
lies in the hands of the Prime Minister.[115] The position of Prime Minister, Greece's head of government, belongs to the current leader of the 
political party that can obtain a vote of confidence by the Parliament. The President of the Republic formally appoints the Prime Minister and, 
on his recommendation, appoints and dismisses the other members of the Cabinet.[112]
Legislative powers are exercised by a 300-member elective unicameral Parliament.[112] Statutes passed by the Parliament are promulgated by the 
President of the Republic.[112] Parliamentary elections are held every four years, but the President of the Republic is obliged to dissolve the 
Parliament earlier on the proposal of the Cabinet, in view of dealing with a national issue of exceptional importance.[112] The President is 
also obliged to dissolve the Parliament earlier, if the opposition manages to pass a motion of no confidence.[112]
Political parties[edit]
Main articles: Political parties of Greece and List of political parties in Greece
Prokopis Pavlopoulos, Head of State since 2015
Since the restoration of democracy, the Greek party system has been dominated by the liberal-conservative New Democracy (ND) and the 
social-democratic Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK).[c] Other significant parties include the Communist Party of Greece (KKE), the 
Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA) the Popular Orthodox Rally (LAOS) and the Popular Association – Golden Dawn.
PASOK and ND largely alternated in power until the outbreak of the government-debt crisis in 2009. Since then, the two major parties, New 
Democracy and PASOK, have seen a sharp decline in popularity.[116][117][118][119][120] In November 2011, the two major parties joined the 
smaller Popular Orthodox Rally in a grand coalition, pledging their parliamentary support for a government of national unity headed by former 
European Central Bank vice-president Lucas Papademos.[121] Panos Kammenos voted against this government and he split off from ND forming the 
right-wing populist Independent Greeks.
The coalition government led the country to the parliamentary elections of May 2012. The power of the traditional Greek political parties, PASOK 
and New Democracy, declined from 43% to 13% and from 33% to 18%, respectively, due to their support for austerity measures. The leftist party 
SYRIZA became the second major party, with an increase from 4% to 16%. No party could form a sustainable government, which led to the 
parliamentary elections of June 2012. The result of the second elections was the formation of a coalition government composed of New Democracy 
(29%), PASOK (12%) and Democratic Left (6%) parties.
Alexis Tsipras led Syriza to victory in the general election held on 25 January 2015, falling short of an outright majority in Parliament by 
just two seats. The following morning, Tsipras reached an agreement with Independent Greeks party to form a coalition, and he was sworn in as 
Prime Minister of Greece. Tsipras called snap elections in August 2015, resigning from his post, which led to a month-long caretaker 
administration headed by judge Vassiliki Thanou-Christophilou, Greece's first female prime minister. In the September 2015 general election, 
Tsipras led Syriza to another victory, winning 145 out of 300 seats and re-forming the coalition with the Independent Greeks.
Foreign relations[edit]
Main article: Foreign relations of Greece
Representation through:[122]      embassy –      embassy in another country
general consulate –      liaison office –      no representation –      Greece
Greece's foreign policy is conducted through the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and its head, the Minister for Foreign Affairs. The current 
minister is Nikos Kotzias. According to the official website, the main aims of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs are to represent Greece before 
other states and international organizations;[123] safeguarding the interests of the Greek state and of its citizens abroad;[123] the promotion 
of Greek culture;[123] the fostering of closer relations with the Greek diaspora;[123] and the promotion of international cooperation.[123] 
Additionally, due to its political and geographical proximity to Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Africa, Greece is a country of significant 
geostrategic importance and is considered to be a middle power[124] and has developed a regional policy to help promote peace and stability in 
the Balkans, the Mediterranean, and the Middle East.[125]
The Ministry identifies three issues as of particular importance to the Greek state: Turkish challenges to Greek sovereignty rights in the 
Aegean Sea and corresponding airspace;[126] the legitimacy of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus on the island of Cyprus;[126] and the 
Macedonia naming dispute[126] with the small Balkan country which shares a name with Greece's largest and second-most-populous region, also 
called Macedonia.
Greece is a member of numerous international organizations, including the Council of Europe, the European Union, the Union for the 
Mediterranean, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Organisation internationale de la francophonie and the United Nations, of which it is 
a founding member.
Law and justice[edit]
Main articles: Judicial system of Greece and Law enforcement in Greece
A courthouse in Nafplio
The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature and comprises three Supreme Courts: the Court of Cassation (Άρειος Πάγος), the 
Council of State (Συμβούλιο της Επικρατείας) and the Court of Auditors (Ελεγκτικό Συνέδριο). The Judiciary system is also composed of civil 
courts, which judge civil and penal cases and administrative courts, which judge disputes between the citizens and the Greek administrative 
authorities.
The Hellenic Police (Greek: Ελληνική Αστυνομία) is the national police force of Greece. It is a very large agency with its responsibilities 
ranging from road traffic control to counter-terrorism. It was established in 1984 under Law 1481/1-10-1984 (Government Gazette 152 A) as the 
result of the fusion of the Gendarmerie (Χωροφυλακή, Chorofylaki) and the Cities Police (Αστυνομία Πόλεων, Astynomia Poleon) forces.[127]
Signing at Zappeion of the documents for the accession of Greece to the European Communities in 1979.
Meanwhile, Andreas Papandreou, George Papandreou's son, founded the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) in response to Karamanlis's 
conservative New Democracy party, with the two political formations dominating in government over the next four decades. Greece rejoined NATO in 
1980.[b][100] Greece became the tenth member of the European Communities (subsequently subsumed by the European Union) on 1 January 1981, 
ushering in a period of sustained growth. Widespread investments in industrial enterprises and heavy infrastructure, as well as funds from the 
European Union and growing revenues from tourism, shipping, and a fast-growing service sector raised the country's standard of living to 
unprecedented levels. Traditionally strained relations with neighbouring Turkey improved when successive earthquakes hit both nations in 1999, 
leading to the lifting of the Greek veto against Turkey's bid for EU membership.
The country adopted the euro in 2001 and successfully hosted the 2004 Summer Olympic Games in Athens.[101] More recently, Greece has suffered 
greatly from the late-2000s recession and has been central to the related European sovereign debt crisis. Due to the adoption of the euro, when 
Greece experienced financial crisis, it could no longer devalue its currency to regain competitiveness. Youth unemployment was especially high 
during the 2000s.[102] The Greek government-debt crisis, subsequent austerity policies, and resultant protests have agitated domestic politics 
and have regularly threatened European and global financial markets since the crisis began in 2010.
Greece's highest development visibility during the twentieth century, is also seen by its HDI component-numeracy, which increased rapidly during 
this period, respectively even though low levels of human capital level persisted even sometime after Ottoman rule ended.[99]
King Constantine II's dismissal of George Papandreou's centrist government in July 1965 prompted a prolonged period of political turbulence 
which culminated in a coup d'état on 21 April 1967 by the Regime of the Colonels. The brutal suppression of the Athens Polytechnic uprising on 
17 November 1973 is claimed to have sent shockwaves through the regime, and a counter-coup overthrew Georgios Papadopoulos to establish 
brigadier Dimitrios Ioannidis as leader. On 20 July 1974, as Turkey invaded the island of Cyprus, the regime collapsed.
Government documents and newspapers were consequently published in Katharevousa (purified) Greek, a form which few ordinary Greeks could read. 
Liberals favoured recognising Demotic as the national language, but conservatives and the Orthodox Church resisted all such efforts, to the 
extent that, when the New Testament was translated into Demotic in 1901, riots erupted in Athens and the government fell (the Evangeliaka). This 
issue would continue to plague Greek politics until the 1970s.
An agreement between Prime Minister Ioannis Metaxas and the head of state George II followed in 1936, which installed Metaxas as the head of a 
dictatorial regime known as the 4th of August Regime, inaugurating a period of authoritarian rule that would last, with short breaks, until 
1974.[91] Although a dictatorship, Greece remained on good terms with Britain and was not allied with the Axis.
On 28 October 1940, Fascist Italy demanded the surrender of Greece, but the Greek administration refused, and, in the following Greco-Italian 
War, Greece repelled Italian forces into Albania, giving the Allies their first victory over Axis forces on land. The Greek struggle and victory 
against the Italians received exuberant praise at the time.[92][93] Most prominent is the quote attributed to Winston Churchill: "Hence we will 
not say that Greeks fight like heroes, but we will say that heroes fight like Greeks."[92] French general Charles de Gaulle was among those who 
praised the fierceness of the Greek resistance. In an official notice released to coincide with the Greek national celebration of the Day of 
Independence, De Gaulle expressed his admiration for the Greek resistance:
In the name of the captured yet still alive French people, France wants to send her greetings to the Greek people who are fighting for their 
freedom. The 25 March 1941 finds Greece in the peak of their heroic struggle and in the top of their glory. Since the Battle of Salamis, Greece 
had not achieved the greatness and the glory which today holds.[93]
The country would eventually fall to urgently dispatched German forces during the Battle of Greece, despite the fierce Greek resistance, 
particularly in the Battle of the Metaxas Line. Adolf Hitler himself recognised the bravery and the courage of the Greek army, stating in his 
address to the Reichstag on 11 December 1941, that: "Historical justice obliges me to state that of the enemies who took up positions against 
us, the Greek soldier particularly fought with the highest courage. He capitulated only when further resistance had become impossible and 
useless."[94]
Amidst general dissatisfaction with the state of the nation, a group of military officers organized a coup in August 1909 and shortly thereafter 
called to power Cretan politician Eleftherios Venizelos. After winning two elections and becoming Prime Minister, Venizelos initiated 
wide-ranging fiscal, social, and constitutional reforms, reorganized the military, made Greece a member of the Balkan League, and led the 
country through the Balkan Wars. By 1913, Greece's territory and population had almost doubled, annexing Crete, Epirus, and Macedonia. In the 
following years, the struggle between King Constantine I and charismatic Venizelos over the country's foreign policy on the eve of World War I 
dominated the country's political scene, and divided the country into two opposing groups. During parts of World War I, Greece had two 
governments; a royalist pro-German government in Athens and a Venizelist pro-Entente one in Thessaloniki. The two governments were united in 
1917, when Greece officially entered the war on the side of the Entente.
In the aftermath of World War I, Greece attempted further expansion into Asia Minor, a region with a large native Greek population at the time, 
but was defeated in the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–1922, contributing to a massive flight of Asia Minor Greeks.[82][83] These events overlapped, 
with both happening during the Greek genocide (1914–1922),[84][85][86][87] a period during which, according to various sources,[88] Ottoman and 
Turkish officials contributed to the death of several hundred thousand Asia Minor Greeks. The resultant Greek exodus from Asia Minor was made 
permanent, and expanded, in an official Population exchange between Greece and Turkey. The exchange was part of the terms of the Treaty of 
Lausanne which ended the war.[89]
The following era was marked by instability, as over 1.5 million propertyless Greek refugees from Turkey had to be integrated into Greek 
society.Cappadocian Greeks, Pontian Greeks, and non-Greek followers of Greek Orthodoxy were all subject to the exchange as well. Some of the 
refugees could not speak the language, and were from what had been unfamiliar environments to mainland Greeks, such as in the case of the 
Cappadocians and non-Greeks. The refugees also made a dramatic post-war population boost, as the amount of refugees was more than a quarter of 
Greece's prior population.[90]
Following the catastrophic events in Asia Minor, the monarchy was abolished via a referendum in 1924 and the Second Hellenic Republic was 
declared. In 1935, a royalist general-turned-politician Georgios Kondylis took power after a coup d'état and abolished the republic, holding a 
rigged referendum, after which King George II returned to Greece and was restored to the throne.
The territorial evolution of Kingdom of Greece until 1947.
All Greeks were united, however, in their determination to liberate the Greek-speaking provinces of the Ottoman Empire, regardless of the 
dialect they spoke. Especially in Crete, a prolonged revolt in 1866–1869 had raised nationalist fervour. When war broke out between Russia and 
the Ottomans in 1877, Greek popular sentiment rallied to Russia's side, but Greece was too poor, and too concerned of British intervention, to 
officially enter the war. Nevertheless, in 1881, Thessaly and small parts of Epirus were ceded to Greece as part of the Treaty of Berlin, while 
frustrating Greek hopes of receiving Crete.
Greeks in Crete continued to stage regular revolts, and in 1897, the Greek government under Theodoros Deligiannis, bowing to popular pressure, 
declared war on the Ottomans. In the ensuing Greco-Turkish War of 1897, the badly trained and equipped Greek army was defeated by the Ottomans. 
Through the intervention of the Great Powers, however, Greece lost only a little territory along the border to Turkey, while Crete was 
established as an autonomous state under Prince George of Greece. With state coffers empty, fiscal policy came under International Financial 
Control. In the next decade, Greek efforts were focused on the Macedonian Struggle, a state-sponsored guerilla campaign against pro-Bulgarian 
rebel gangs in Ottoman-ruled Macedonia, which ended inconclusively with the Young Turk Revolution in 1908.